docs/users-guide.md, before:

# falcon-correlate User's Guide

This guide provides instructions for using `falcon-correlate`, a correlation ID
middleware for the Falcon web framework.

## Installation

```bash
pip install falcon-correlate
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Usage

Add the `CorrelationIDMiddleware` to your Falcon application:

```python
import falcon
from falcon_correlate import CorrelationIDMiddleware

# Create the middleware instance
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware()

# Create your Falcon app with the middleware
app = falcon.App(middleware=[middleware])


# Define your resources
class HelloResource:
    def on_get(self, req, resp):
        resp.media = {"message": "Hello, World!"}


# Add routes
app.add_route("/hello", HelloResource())
```

### How It Works

The middleware provides two hook points in the request/response lifecycle:

1. **`process_request(req, resp)`**: Called before routing the request to a
   resource. This is where the correlation ID will be retrieved from incoming
   headers or generated.

2. **`process_response(req, resp, resource, req_succeeded)`**: Called after the
   resource responder has been invoked. This is where the correlation ID will
   be added to response headers and any cleanup will be performed.

### Header retrieval and trusted source behaviour

During `process_request`, the middleware reads the configured header name and
checks whether the request originates from a trusted source. The correlation ID
stored on `req.context.correlation_id` is determined as follows:

1. If a valid header value is present and the request source is trusted, the
   incoming ID is accepted after trimming leading and trailing whitespace.

2. If a valid header value is present but the request source is not trusted,
   the incoming ID is rejected and a new ID is generated using the configured
   generator.

3. If the header is missing, empty, or contains only whitespace, a new ID is
   generated using the configured generator.

This design ensures that every request receives a correlation ID for complete
traceability, while preventing untrusted clients from injecting arbitrary IDs
into the system.

## Configuration Options

The middleware accepts several configuration options as keyword-only arguments:

### header_name

The HTTP header name used for incoming and outgoing correlation IDs.

- **Type**: `str`
- **Default**: `"X-Correlation-ID"`

```python
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(header_name="X-Request-ID")
```

### trusted_sources

A collection of IP addresses or Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) subnets
considered trusted. Correlation IDs will only be accepted from requests
originating from these addresses.

- **Type**: `Iterable[str] | None`
- **Default**: `None` (no sources trusted)

Both exact IP addresses and CIDR subnet notation are supported:

```python
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(
    trusted_sources=[
        "127.0.0.1",           # Exact IPv4 address
        "10.0.0.0/8",          # IPv4 CIDR subnet
        "192.168.1.0/24",      # Another IPv4 subnet
        "::1",                 # Exact IPv6 address
        "2001:db8::/32",       # IPv6 CIDR subnet
    ]
)
```

**Important notes:**

- IP addresses and CIDR notations are validated at configuration time. Invalid
  formats will raise `ValueError`.
- CIDR notation must specify network addresses, not host addresses. For example,
  `10.0.0.0/24` is valid, but `10.0.0.5/24` will raise an error because it has
  host bits set.
- An empty or unspecified `trusted_sources` means no sources are trusted, and
  all incoming IDs are rejected. New IDs will be generated for every request.

**Security note**: Only add IP addresses that are fully trusted to propagate
correlation IDs. Misconfiguration could allow malicious actors to inject
arbitrary IDs.

### generator

A callable that generates new correlation IDs. Must take no arguments and
return a string.

- **Type**: `Callable[[], str] | None`
- **Default**: `default_uuid7_generator` (returns UUIDv7 hex strings via
  `uuid.uuid7()` when available, otherwise `uuid-utils`)

```python
import uuid

def custom_generator() -> str:
    return f"req-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(generator=custom_generator)
```

### validator

An optional callable that validates incoming correlation IDs. Takes a string
and returns `True` if the ID is valid, `False` otherwise. Invalid IDs are
discarded and new ones are generated.

- **Type**: `Callable[[str], bool] | None`
- **Default**: `None` (no validation beyond trust checking)

```python
import re

UUID_PATTERN = re.compile(
    r"^[0-9a-f]{8}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{12}$",
    re.IGNORECASE,
)

def uuid_validator(value: str) -> bool:
    return bool(UUID_PATTERN.match(value))

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(validator=uuid_validator)
```

### echo_header_in_response

Whether to include the correlation ID in response headers.

- **Type**: `bool`
- **Default**: `True`

```python
# Disable echoing correlation ID in responses
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(echo_header_in_response=False)
```

## Full Configuration Example

```python
import falcon
from falcon_correlate import CorrelationIDMiddleware

def custom_generator() -> str:
    import uuid
    return str(uuid.uuid4())

def custom_validator(value: str) -> bool:
    # Accept any non-empty string up to 64 characters
    return bool(value) and len(value) <= 64

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(
    header_name="X-Request-ID",
    trusted_sources=["10.0.0.0/8", "192.168.0.0/16"],
    generator=custom_generator,
    validator=custom_validator,
    echo_header_in_response=True,
)

app = falcon.App(middleware=[middleware])
```

## Current Status

The following functionality is now implemented:

- Middleware configuration options (header name, generator, validator, etc.).
- Header retrieval and whitespace normalization.
- Trusted source IP/CIDR matching.
- Default UUIDv7 generator implementation.
- Automatic correlation ID generation for requests without valid incoming IDs.
- Custom generator injection support.

The following functionality will be added in future releases:

- Incoming ID validation (task 2.3).
- Context variable storage (task 2.4).
- Logging integration (task 3.1).

See the [roadmap](roadmap.md) for the full implementation plan.

Commit message:

feat(uuid-validator): add default UUID validator for correlation IDs
- Implement `default_uuid_validator(value: str) -> bool` in middleware to validate standard UUID formats (versions 1-8), supporting hyphenated and hex-only forms.
- Reject empty, malformed, or excessively long strings (>36 chars).
- Export validator from `falcon_correlate.__init__`.
- Add comprehensive unit tests covering valid and invalid UUID cases.
- Add BDD scenarios and step definitions to verify validator behavior.
- Update user guide documentation with usage examples.
- Mark task 2.3.1 complete in roadmap.

This validator enables middleware to robustly reject malformed correlation IDs, improving request validation and ID generation reliability.

Co-authored-by: devboxerhub[bot] <devboxerhub[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/users-guide.md, after:

# falcon-correlate User's Guide

This guide provides instructions for using `falcon-correlate`, a correlation ID
middleware for the Falcon web framework.

## Installation

```bash
pip install falcon-correlate
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Usage

Add the `CorrelationIDMiddleware` to your Falcon application:

```python
import falcon
from falcon_correlate import CorrelationIDMiddleware

# Create the middleware instance
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware()

# Create your Falcon app with the middleware
app = falcon.App(middleware=[middleware])


# Define your resources
class HelloResource:
    def on_get(self, req, resp):
        resp.media = {"message": "Hello, World!"}


# Add routes
app.add_route("/hello", HelloResource())
```

### How It Works

The middleware provides two hook points in the request/response lifecycle:

1. **`process_request(req, resp)`**: Called before routing the request to a
   resource. This is where the correlation ID will be retrieved from incoming
   headers or generated.

2. **`process_response(req, resp, resource, req_succeeded)`**: Called after the
   resource responder has been invoked. This is where the correlation ID will
   be added to response headers and any cleanup will be performed.

### Header retrieval and trusted source behaviour

During `process_request`, the middleware reads the configured header name and
checks whether the request originates from a trusted source. The correlation ID
stored on `req.context.correlation_id` is determined as follows:

1. If a valid header value is present and the request source is trusted, the
   incoming ID is accepted after trimming leading and trailing whitespace.

2. If a valid header value is present but the request source is not trusted,
   the incoming ID is rejected and a new ID is generated using the configured
   generator.

3. If the header is missing, empty, or contains only whitespace, a new ID is
   generated using the configured generator.

This design ensures that every request receives a correlation ID for complete
traceability, while preventing untrusted clients from injecting arbitrary IDs
into the system.

## Configuration Options

The middleware accepts several configuration options as keyword-only arguments:

### header_name

The HTTP header name used for incoming and outgoing correlation IDs.

- **Type**: `str`
- **Default**: `"X-Correlation-ID"`

```python
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(header_name="X-Request-ID")
```

### trusted_sources

A collection of IP addresses or Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) subnets
considered trusted. Correlation IDs will only be accepted from requests
originating from these addresses.

- **Type**: `Iterable[str] | None`
- **Default**: `None` (no sources trusted)

Both exact IP addresses and CIDR subnet notation are supported:

```python
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(
    trusted_sources=[
        "127.0.0.1",           # Exact IPv4 address
        "10.0.0.0/8",          # IPv4 CIDR subnet
        "192.168.1.0/24",      # Another IPv4 subnet
        "::1",                 # Exact IPv6 address
        "2001:db8::/32",       # IPv6 CIDR subnet
    ]
)
```

**Important notes:**

- IP addresses and CIDR notations are validated at configuration time. Invalid
  formats will raise `ValueError`.
- CIDR notation must specify network addresses, not host addresses. For example,
  `10.0.0.0/24` is valid, but `10.0.0.5/24` will raise an error because it has
  host bits set.
- An empty or unspecified `trusted_sources` means no sources are trusted, and
  all incoming IDs are rejected. New IDs will be generated for every request.

**Security note**: Only add IP addresses that are fully trusted to propagate
correlation IDs. Misconfiguration could allow malicious actors to inject
arbitrary IDs.

### generator

A callable that generates new correlation IDs. Must take no arguments and
return a string.

- **Type**: `Callable[[], str] | None`
- **Default**: `default_uuid7_generator` (returns UUIDv7 hex strings via
  `uuid.uuid7()` when available, otherwise `uuid-utils`)

```python
import uuid

def custom_generator() -> str:
    return f"req-{uuid.uuid4().hex[:8]}"

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(generator=custom_generator)
```

### validator

An optional callable that validates incoming correlation IDs. Takes a string
and returns `True` if the ID is valid, `False` otherwise. Invalid IDs are
discarded and new ones are generated.

- **Type**: `Callable[[str], bool] | None`
- **Default**: `None` (no validation beyond trust checking)

The library provides `default_uuid_validator` as a ready-to-use validator that
accepts any standard UUID format (versions 1-8), both hyphenated
(`xxxxxxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx`) and hex-only (32 characters). It is
case-insensitive and rejects empty, malformed, or excessively long strings.

```python
from falcon_correlate import CorrelationIDMiddleware, default_uuid_validator

# Use the built-in UUID validator
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(validator=default_uuid_validator)
```

For custom validation requirements, provide your own validator function:

```python
import re

UUID_PATTERN = re.compile(
    r"^[0-9a-f]{8}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{4}-[0-9a-f]{12}$",
    re.IGNORECASE,
)

def uuid_validator(value: str) -> bool:
    return bool(UUID_PATTERN.match(value))

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(validator=uuid_validator)
```

### echo_header_in_response

Whether to include the correlation ID in response headers.

- **Type**: `bool`
- **Default**: `True`

```python
# Disable echoing correlation ID in responses
middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(echo_header_in_response=False)
```

## Full Configuration Example

```python
import falcon
from falcon_correlate import CorrelationIDMiddleware

def custom_generator() -> str:
    import uuid
    return str(uuid.uuid4())

def custom_validator(value: str) -> bool:
    # Accept any non-empty string up to 64 characters
    return bool(value) and len(value) <= 64

middleware = CorrelationIDMiddleware(
    header_name="X-Request-ID",
    trusted_sources=["10.0.0.0/8", "192.168.0.0/16"],
    generator=custom_generator,
    validator=custom_validator,
    echo_header_in_response=True,
)

app = falcon.App(middleware=[middleware])
```

## Current Status

The following functionality is now implemented:

- Middleware configuration options (header name, generator, validator, etc.).
- Header retrieval and whitespace normalization.
- Trusted source IP/CIDR matching.
- Default UUIDv7 generator implementation.
- Automatic correlation ID generation for requests without valid incoming IDs.
- Custom generator injection support.
- Default UUID validator for incoming ID format validation.

The following functionality will be added in future releases:

- Validation integration into request processing (task 2.3.2).
- Context variable storage (task 2.4).
- Logging integration (task 3.1).

See the [roadmap](roadmap.md) for the full implementation plan.
